[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>JOEL FUHRMAN: We have
an unbelievable epidemic
of diabetes in this country.
The rates of diabetes
are skyrocketing.
And it parallels the
epidemic of obesity.
We have the most
overweight population ever
in the history of
the human race,
and it's still growing fatter.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>FRED BISCI: More people
today are taking drugs
than ever before.
Type 2 diabetes has tripled
in the last 10 years.
That's a lifestyle disease.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>KIRT TYSON: What
most people don't know
is that diabetes can be cured.
How do I know?
I was diagnosed with
type 1 diabetes.
However, under the care
of Dr. Gabriel Cousens,
my life was totally transformed.
Dr. Cousens had me
eat only raw foods
and take live
supplements for 30 days.
My glucose levels are
normal, and I still
do not need to take insulin.
So what is diabetes?
What are the causes, symptoms,
and most importantly, the cure?
This chapter addresses
those issues and much more.
>>GARY NULL: Diabetes is
a form of dysinsulinism,
meaning that a person
is either secreting
adequate amounts of
insulin, but the body is not
able to utilize it,
or the body is not
secreting from the pancreas
adequate amounts of insulin.
In either case, the
person's blood sugar
becomes elevated and stays
elevated and therefore requires
some form of
intervention to lower it.
>> Diabetes is caused by
a combination of factors.
But it's mostly caused by
fat on the body, especially
fat on the midsection, because
abdominal fat represents fat
that's stored internally in your
tissues and around your organs.
So fat blocks the
absorption of insulin.
And then your pancreas is
asked to produce more insulin
in response to the
blockage effect--
the blocking effect of all
the extra fat on the body.
And eventually, the
pancreas poops out,
or it can't produce
so much insulin.
And now it's not
producing enough insulin
for the body's needs.
>>JULIAN WHITAKER: People got
to realize that there are two
forms of diabetes--
the type that needs the insulin,
and the type that just is
diabetic because they're heavy.
Now, the type that has
diabetes cause they're heavy
actually is producing
more insulin
than the normal individual.
>> In most cases
of type 2 diabetes,
the body is still producing
sufficient amount of insulin
for a thin person, but just
not enough insulin for a fat
person.
And if the person
loses weight, they
can become non-diabetic,
defined by the fact
that they don't need any
medication to keep their blood
sugars in the normal range.
>>GABRIEL COUSENS: What are
the big causes of diabetes?
High sugar, number one.
20 years after sugar is
brought into any culture,
there's an outbreak of diabetes.
Two, meat and dairy in the diet.
High animal fat is right up
there right behind sugar.
Three, caffeine.
One cup of coffee will increase
your interim resistance by 33%.
Cigarettes do the same thing.
They greatly increase your
insulin resistance, which
is a precursor to diabetes.
Pesticides and herbicides
and heavy metals
tend to block the function
of the insulin system
and increase your
insulin resistance.
>>DAVID WOLFE: The
symptoms of diabetes type 2
when they first come on is
excessive urination or sweet
urine.
And that symptom is a clue as to
what the cause of diabetes is.
Excessive urination
is an inability
to hold onto minerals or an
inability to utilize minerals.
It's an illness that
affects the pancreas.
And one thing that we are not
taught about the pancreas,
but is true, is that the
pancreas has the largest draw
or pull for trace minerals of
any organ or gland in our body.
>> In both type 1 and type 2,
if they are throwing in a lot
of carbohydrate and a
lot of starch and a lot
of high-glycemic food
into the bloodstream--
you're eating cakes and
breads and pastas and things
like that, either
the body is going
to have to produce
a lot of insulin,
or you're going to have to
inject a lot of insulin.
You reduce that kind of
carbohydrate or sugar load;
your insulin requirement's
going to go way down.
That's the first thing.
The second thing
is the kind of food
you eat is going to determine
the sensitivity of the insulin,
whether it is made by your
body or whether you inject it
>> The problem with
insulin, of course,
is that insulin is a
atherosclerotic-genic agent.
That means that insulin
promotes the progression
of atherosclerosis.
And insulin increases
their appetite.
It makes them eat more.
It makes them become
more overweight
and then become more
diabetic and need
more drugs and more insulin.
And the problem is not
insulin deficiency,
it's insulin resistance.
>> The whole approach of using
insulin to alleviate diabetic
symptoms is a Band-Aid approach.
And it's actually a
dangerous approach
because insulin is a synthetic
chemical that is mimicking
the body's natural insulin.
>> And it's done.
>> There's a lot of assumptions
that go into this understanding
that, hey, we're just using
the same compound as your body
produces.
It's not the same compound
because we're only
talking about one aspect
of the fabric of reality.
And part of that fabric
that flows one direction
is chemistry.
Part of the fabric that
flows the other direction
is the love, the overall
symbiotic relationship
of all the different chemicals
in the body to each other
and all the difficult factors.
So to put just one part of it
in there, just that insulin,
it's a Band-Aid approach.
And eventually, all the
problems still show up anyway.
And then insulin
resistance develops
where the body starts to resist
this unnatural form of insulin.
And it's kind of just
prolonging the inevitable.
>> There's also a fact of
nutrient nutritional imbalances
and deficiencies that makes
the pancreas not responsive.
So there's a certain
loss of function
of the pancreas due to
the lack of phytonutrients
and the variety of the
symphony of nutrients
we need for normal
tissue function.
In other words, the cells don't
function at full efficiency
when you just supply them
with some macronutrients.
They need a full symphony of the
full complement of the artistry
of thousands of
different discovered
and undiscovered chemicals to
maximize cellular function.
>> Attempting to alleviate the
symptoms of diabetes type 2
using pharmaceutical
medications,
mineral-deficient food,
non-absorbable supplements is
moot.
It's not going to work.
We have to get right down
to the cause of the problem.
And the cause of the problem
is the poor quality of food--
not just the way
that it's raised.
But the soil quality,
the mineral density
of the food when it reaches the
market, the whole entire way
that food is actually eaten--
the processing of it, the
heating, the roasting,
and all those things are
decreasing the mineral
availability of what's there.
And there's not much
there to even begin with.
>>MORGAN SPURLOCK: We
see so much money being
spent on diabetes research.
And we see so much money just
being wasted in a lot of ways,
whether it's through
research grants,
or it's through
different drug plans.
And especially, when you look
at groups like the American
Diabetes Association,
which continues
to get money from people like
Cadbury Schweppes or Pepsi
or candy companies--
these are the people who
are financing studies--
you have to ask yourself,
whose best interests are
being served?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When you're dealing with
something like diabetes,
which is a mineral deficiency
syndrome and coupled with that,
a sugar addiction syndrome and
carbohydrate addiction problem,
and then you're
taking those people,
and you're putting them
on to natural food,
you're getting two effects.
One is they're getting
real, nourishing food
for the first time.
So you're going to have
an inhibition of appetite
almost immediately
where they're suddenly
not going to be hungry because
they're getting what they need.
And then you're going to have
a detoxification effect, which
is the effect of
pulling the plug out
of the bathtub, a draining
away of all the stuff.
The good stuff is
pushing out the bad.
Because once you really
get on the natural food,
and you have a little bit
of education around it,
you realize that it's not the
food that's doing it to you.
It's your body saying, time
to get out the garbage.
>> A person that's a diabetic,
exercise is critically
important because the amount of
sugar you're going to spill is
based on the calories you're
taking in and the calories
you're burning up in
your daily activity.
So if you're a
diabetic, if you're
eating blended salads
and a lot of greens,
you're not eating
a lot of fruit,
and you're eating
some nut pates,
you're going to be burning up
everything you're taking in.
There isn't anything be
left over to spill sugar.
That's the key.
Years ago before they had
insulin, people that were
diabetics, they starved them.
Their blood sugar went
down, but some of them
died from starvation.
So now, we have the information
available, especially
with the greens and
understanding that greens
are secondary sunlight.
They are, for an
efficient person--
they provide a lot of energy.
You definitely can get
into a healthy diet,
be on a low-calorie diet,
slow down your aging process,
enable your body
to restore itself
to restore its ability
so you will not
be functioning like a type 2
or like any kind of a diabetic.
>> You just don't give
individuals food that are going
to make the blood sugar go up.
You concentrate
on protein foods.
You eliminate a lot
of the dietary fats.
You increase a lot
of the dietary fiber.
You increase a lot of
the vegetables, fruits
in a little bit more
moderation, and you're
going to get dramatic results.
>> Type 2 diabetes is very
much related genetically.
85% of the people with type 2
have someone in their family
who has a genetic tendency.
And now we need
to be very clear--
genetics load the gun.
A culture of death
lifestyle pulls the trigger.
So we can't say, oh,
it's my genetics.
That's a cop out.
What we are saying is, if
you lead a healthy lifestyle,
you will upgrade your
genetic expression
so you will not get diabetes.
>> Autoimmune diseases such
as diabetes represent-- well,
autoimmune is essentially
a Latin way of saying
self-destruction.
And this is what autoimmune
diseases are-- so
that the relevance about
these is that they're really
brought on by the individual.
And it's their own
system acting in a sense
of overacting perhaps or
at least targeting self.
>> I know one woman
in particular.
She's been a type 1
diabetic for over 30 years.
She follows the best
diet I have ever seen.
She's a raw fooder.
She doesn't eat much
in the way of fruit.
She got her insulin
all the way down,
but she's never been successful
in coming off her insulin.
So everybody's a
unique individual.
>> Now, diabetes is a killer.
But diabetes almost
never comes along.
And the problem is if you
have a therapy for diabetes,
and you focus just on diabetes,
you miss the larger picture.
There's disharmony
in the person.
It may be a combination
of spiritual, emotional,
intellectual, creative,
or cellular harmony
that is out of balance.
>> So in a case of
patients with diabetes,
it's a self-destruction process
of life not being sweet enough.
They're not being good enough--
that they will never make
it, or their parents--
or make them average.
It's the kind of thing like
when a student comes home
with a report card
with four A's and a B.
And the parents spend all
the time talking about,
well, how the heck did
you get a stupid B?
Without ever mentioning the
fact that they did the four A's.
The parents'
intention, of course,
is, well, you could do better.
But by saying that, what they
really emphasized to this child
is not good enough.
Almost inevitably, go
back into their history,
and you will find that they came
from developmental situations
that compromised them
and disempowered them
with limiting beliefs
that were programmed
into their subconscious mind.
As they got older, not even
knowing the subconscious
mind was there, not
even knowing that it's
working 95% of the day, from
their little narrow conscious
view looking at the
world, they're a victim.
It's not me.
I have all the great intentions,
so I don't know why I'm sick.
And the issue is,
can I change it?
Not by the conscious mind alone.
You need something to push
it into the subconscious mind
because that's the
source of the problem.
>> So until you examine the
interconnectedness of all these
different things and realize
we're not dealing with nouns--
see, as you approach your
topic, this is diabetes.
OK, 50 people, tell me
how you treat diabetes?
It's not going to do
any good to anybody.
Look at it as a verb not a noun.
As a verb, you
don't have diabetes.
You're diabetesing, all right?
You're processing.
And processes can be changed.
>> We've had thousands of
patients come in taking
the diabetic drug and
systematically get off of it
very quickly--
never to have it used again.
>> Diabetes is reversible.
I personally helped
countless numbers of people
improve the quality
of their life
to where they no longer
required insulin or had
substantial reduction.
And as long as they
maintained healthy choices
and surrendered
unhealthy choices,
they could reasonably expect to
maintain a normal blood sugar
level.
>> But it's not just
me that can do this.
It's anybody can do it.
And I know people
look inside their life
and see the stuff that
they want, and they go out
and get it.
And if you see that
you want to be healed,
you'll go out and get it.
>> For me, when I see
something like this--
and it's something so easy
and so affordable in a lot
of ways--
that you could turn
around somebody's life
where they're not
suddenly becoming--
they're not going
to live a lifetime
reliant on medications.
It's like, why haven't
we done this before?
Why hasn't the study
been done before?
Why haven't people heard
about things like this?
There's a friend of
mine who is diabetic.
I sent him to the website.
And he said, how's
this possible?
He's been type 1
diabetic for years.
I think it hit him
when he was 12 or 13,
somewhere in that range.
And he's about my age
now, like, 35, 36.
And I showed him the trailer.
And he's like,
that's impossible.
I can't believe it.
And he says, you know what?
I guess I'm going to go raw.
I'm going to try it out.
And so he went raw.
And I don't know how many
weeks it was that he went by,
but basically everything
became so balanced and even.
The numbers dropped and he
became completely regulated.
And when he talked
to his doctor--
he basically talked to
his doctor on the phone
and said here's what I'm doing.
The doctor's like,
oh that doesn't work.
You shouldn't do that.
But he saw his numbers change.
And he saw himself feeling
better and got to the point
where he didn't
have to didn't have
to do that over the course
of the day, which is--
it's amazing.
It's amazing.
>> So basically, it
brings back responsibility
to the individual for
their health rather than
the perception that they've been
provided over years and years
and years that they're
more or less victims.
And they're frail biochemical
devices where everything
out there could destroy them.
And it's like this
is so incorrect.
Some people, if their
mind isn't right,
they can have this
microbiotic diet,
they could eat the raw food.
If their mind isn't right,
that's the weak point.
So it's not that the
food alone will do it,
but the food with the
mind together will do it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]